The Evolution of Computers

Early Stages Of ComputersAbacus
The abacus was an early aid for mathematical computations. Its only value is that it aids the memory of the human performing the calculation. A skilled abacus operator can work on addition and subtraction problems at the speed of a person equipped with a hand calculator (multiplication and division are slower).

Abacus
The abacus is often wrongly attributed to China. In fact, the oldest surviving abacus was used in 300 B.C. by the Babylonians. The abacus is still in use today, principally in the far east. 

John Napier
In 1617 an eccentric (some say mad) Scotsman named John Napier invented logarithms, which are a technology that allows multiplication to be performed via addition.
Ex: log2x = 5

Napier’s Bones
The magic ingredient is the logarithm of each operand, which was originally obtained from a printed table. But Napier also invented an alternative to tables, where the logarithm values were carved on ivory sticks which are now called Napier's Bones. 

Napier’s Bones

Slide Rule
Napier's invention led directly to the slide rule, first built in England in 1632 and still in use in the 1960's by the NASA engineers of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs which landed men on the moon. 

Leonardo da Vinci
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) made drawings of gear-driven calculating machines but apparently never built any. 

Calculating Clock
The first gear-driven calculating machine to actually be built was probably the calculating clock, so named by its inventor, the German professor Wilhelm Schickard in 1623. This device got little publicity because Schickard died soon afterward in the bubonic plague. 

Blaise Pascal
In 1642 Blaise Pascal, at age 19, invented the Pascaline as an aid for his father who was a tax collector. Pascal built 50 of this gear-driven one-function calculator (it could only add) but couldn't sell many because of their exorbitant cost and because they really weren't that accurate (at that time it was not possible to fabricate gears with the required precision).
Up until the present age when car dashboards went digital, the odometer portion of a car's speedometer used the very same mechanism as the Pascaline to increment the next wheel after each full revolution of the prior wheel.

8-digit Pascaline

6-digit Pascaline ( Cheaper )

Pascaline Insides

Leibniz
Just a few years after Pascal, the German Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (co-inventor with Newton of calculus) managed to build a four-function (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) calculator that he called the stepped reckoner because, instead of gears, it employed fluted drums having ten flutes arranged around their circumference in a stair-step fashion. Although the stepped reckoner employed the decimal number system (each drum had 10 flutes), Leibniz was the first to advocate use of the binary number system which is fundamental to the operation of modern computers. Leibniz is considered one of the greatest of the philosophers but he died poor and alone. 

Stepped Reckoner

Jacquard
In 1801 the Frenchman Joseph Marie Jacquard invented a power loom that could base its weave (and hence the design on the fabric) upon a pattern automatically read from punched wooden cards, held together in a long row by rope. Descendents of these punched cards have been in use ever since (remember the "hanging chad" from the Florida presidential ballots of the year 2000?). 

Jacquard’s Loom
By selecting particular cards for Jacquard's loom you defined the woven pattern

Close up of a card

Jacquard’s Loom
Close up of a tapestry woven by the loom

Technology -vs- Jobs
Jacquard's technology was a real boon to mill owners, but put many loom operators out of work. Angry mobs smashed Jacquard looms and once attacked Jacquard himself. History is full of examples of labor unrest following technological innovation yet most studies show that, overall, technology has actually increased the number of jobs. 

Starting OF new GenerationCharle’s Babbage
By 1822 the English mathematician Charles Babbage was proposing a steam driven calculating machine the size of a room, which he called the Difference Engine. 

Difference Engine
This machine would be able to compute tables of numbers, such as logarithm tables. 
He obtained government funding for this project due to the importance of numeric tables in ocean navigation. 
Construction of Babbage's Difference Engine proved exceedingly difficult and the project soon became the most expensive government funded project up to that point in English history. 
Ten years later the device was still nowhere near complete, acrimony abounded between all involved, and funding dried up. The device was never finished. 

Babbage – Analytic Engine
The Analytic Engine also had a key function that distinguishes computers from calculators: the conditional statement. 
A conditional statement allows a program to achieve different results each time it is run. 
Based on the conditional statement, the path of the program can be determined based upon a situation that is detected at the very moment the program is running. 

Ada Byron
Babbage befriended Ada Byron, the daughter of the famous poet Lord Byron 
Though she was only 19, she was fascinated by Babbage's ideas 
 She began fashioning programs for the Analytic Engine, although still unbuilt. 
 The Analytic Engine remained unbuilt (the British government refused to get involved with this one) but Ada earned her spot in history as the first computer programmer. 
Ada invented the subroutine and was the first to recognize the importance of looping. 

US Census
The next breakthrough occurred in America. The U.S. Constitution states that a census should be taken of all U.S. citizens every 10 years in order to determine the representation of the states in Congress. 
While the very first census of 1790 had only required 9 months, by 1880 the U.S. population had grown so much that the count for the 1880 census took 7.5 years. Automation was clearly needed for the next census. 
The census bureau offered a prize for an inventor to help with the 1890 census and this prize was won by Herman Hollerith, 

Hollerith Desk

Hollerith Desk
Hollerith's technique was successful and the 1890 census was completed in only 3 years at a savings of 5 million dollars. 

IBM
Hollerith built a company, the Tabulating Machine Company which, after a few buyouts, eventually became International Business Machines, known today as IBM. 

Hollerith’s Inovation
By using punch cards, Hollerith created a way to store and retrieve information.
This was the first type of read and write technology

Examples of Punch Cards

The Future of Computers?
IBM had commissioned this study to determine whether it should bother developing this new invention into one of its standard products (up until then computers were one-of-a-kind items built by special arrangement). 
Aiken's prediction wasn't actually so bad as there were very few institutions (principally, the government and military) that could afford the cost of what was called a computer in 1947. 
He just didn't foresee the micro-electronics revolution which would allow something like an IBM Stretch computer of 1959: 


First Generation Computers
The first electronic computer was designed at Iowa State between 1939-1942
The Atanasoff-Berry Computer used the binary system(1’s and 0’s).
Contained vacuum tubes and stored numbers for calculations by burning holes in paper

IBM Stretch - 1959
34
Start here today!!

IBM Stretch - 1959

Atanasoff – Berry Computer
One of the earliest attempts to build an all-electronic (that is, no gears, cams, belts, shafts, etc.) digital computer occurred in 1937 by J. V. Atanasoff, 
 This machine was the first to store data as a charge on a capacitor, which is how today's computers store information in their main memory (DRAM or dynamic RAM). As far as its inventors were aware, it was also the first to employ binary arithmetic. 

Colussus
The Colossus, built during World War II by Britain for the purpose of breaking the cryptographic codes used by Germany.
Britain led the world in designing and building electronic machines dedicated to code breaking, and was routinely able to read coded Germany radio transmissions. 
Not a general purpose, reprogrammable machine. 

Eniac
The title of forefather of today's all-electronic digital computers is usually awarded to ENIAC, which stood for Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator. 
ENIAC was built at the University of Pennsylvania between 1943 and 1945 by two professors, John Mauchly and the 24 year old J. Presper Eckert, who got funding from the war department after promising they could build a machine that would replace all the "computers”
ENIAC filled a 20 by 40 foot room, weighed 30 tons, and used more than 18,000 vacuum tubes.
From William Stallings………. 

ENIAC

ENIAC

Programming the ENIAC
To reprogram the ENIAC you had to rearrange the patch cords that you can observe on the left in the prior photo, and the settings of 3000 switches that you can observe on the right. 
To program a modern computer, you type out a program with statements like: 
Circumference = 3.14 * diameter 
To perform this computation on ENIAC you had to rearrange a large number of patch cords and then locate three particular knobs on that vast wall of knobs and set them to 3, 1, and 4. 

Programming the ENIAC

Problems with the ENIAC
The ENIAC used 18,000 vacuum tubes to hold a charge
Vacuum tubes were so notoriously unreliable that even twenty years later many neighborhood drug stores provided a "tube tester" 


Replacing a vacuum tube

The Stored Program Computer
In 1945 John von Neumann presented his idea of a computer that would store computer instructions in a CPU
The CPU(Central Processing Unit) consisted of elements that would control the computer electronically

The Stored Program Computer	
The EDVAC, EDSAC and UNIVAC were the first computers to use the stored program concept
They used vacuum tubes so they were too expensive and too large for households to own and afford


Second Generation Computers
In 1947, the transistor was invented
The transistor made computers smaller, less expensive and increased calculating speeds.

Second Generation Computers
Second generation computers also saw a new way data was stored
Punch cards were replaced with magnetic tapes and reel to reel machines

Univac
The UNIVAC computer was the first commercial (mass produced) computer. 
In the 50's, UNIVAC (a contraction of "Universal Automatic Computer") was the household word for "computer" just as "Kleenex" is for "tissue". 
UNIVAC was also the first computer to employ magnetic tape. 


Third Generation Computers
Transistors were replaced by integrated circuits(IC)
One IC could replace hundreds of transistors
This made computers even smaller and faster.


Fourth Generation Computers
In 1970 the Intel Corporation invented the Microprocessor:an entire CPU on one chip
This led to microcomputers-computers on a desk

Computer Programming in the ’70’s
If you learned computer programming in the 1970's, you dealt with what today are called mainframe computers, such as the IBM 7090 (shown below), IBM 360, or IBM 370. 

Time-Sharing
There were 2 ways to interact with a mainframe. 
The first was called time sharing because the computer gave each user a tiny sliver of time in a round-robin fashion. 
Perhaps 100 users would be simultaneously logged on, each typing on a teletype such as the following: 

Teletype
A teletype was a motorized typewriter that could transmit your keystrokes to the mainframe and then print the computer's response on its roll of paper. 
You typed a single line of text, hit the carriage return button, and waited for the teletype to begin noisily printing the computer's response

Batch-Mode Processing
The alternative to time sharing was batch mode processing, where the computer gives its full attention to your program. 
In exchange for getting the computer's full attention at run-time, you had to agree to prepare your program off-line on a key punch machine which generated punch cards. 

Punch Cards
University students in the 1970's bought blank cards a linear foot at a time from the university bookstore. 
Each card could hold only 1 program statement. 
To submit your program to the mainframe, you placed your stack of cards in the hopper of a card reader. 
Your program would be run whenever the computer made it that far. 
You often submitted your deck and then went to dinner or to bed and came back later hoping to see a successful printout showing your results

Programming Today
But things changed fast. By the 1990's a university student would typically own his own computer and have exclusive use of it in his dorm room. 

Microprocessor
This transformation was a result of the invention of the microprocessor. 
A microprocessor (uP) is a computer that is fabricated on an integrated circuit (IC). 
Computers had been around for 20 years before the first microprocessor was developed at Intel in 1971. 

Microprocessor
The micro in the name microprocessor refers to the physical size. 
Intel didn't invent the electronic computer, but they were the first to succeed in cramming an entire computer on a single chip (IC) 

Integrated Circuits
The microelectronics revolution is what allowed the amount of hand-crafted wiring seen in the prior photo to be mass-produced as an integrated circuit which is a small sliver of silicon the size of your thumbnail 

Integrated Circuits
Integrated circuits and microprocessors allowed computers to be faster
This led to a new age of computers
The first home-brew computers is called the ALTAIR 8800

Apple 1 Computer - 1976

The IBM PC

Commodore 64

Apple Macintosh

The Amiga

Windows 3

Macintosh System 7

Apple Newton

Standard UNIX

PowerPC

IBM OS/2

